---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/20-literature-notes/polito2019/","title":"2TSW Automated Assessment of Computer Programming Assignments, in a Gamified Web Based System","tags":["computer-science","gamification"],"noteIcon":"","created":"2024.08.30 17:34","updated":"2024.09.09 16:17"}
---


> [!abstract]+
> Automated assessment and feedback of computer programming tasks can be a significant asset in computer science education. Web based systems providing such capabilities are designed to apply techniques ranging from static analysis of program correctness, to testing-based evaluation, and often can have application in frameworks supporting competitive programming. Here we report on the 2TSW system, which uses the testing-based approach in a gamified web-based environment. In 2TSWa learner can access a list of assignments, submit solutions and have such solutions tested and graded. The quality of the solutions contributes to the contents of the student’s profile, showing experience points, medals gained for assignments, assignment categories badges, and an appropriate overall status badge. The personal profile allows the student to monitor her/his proceedings. The gamified structure of the system, together with the provision of real-time automated assessment, offers the opportunity for an increasing level of students’ personal engagement and motivation. We describe the system, and provide the reader with the results of a field experimentation, conducted in a first-year computer programming course, bachelor in Computer Engineering. The data analysis of a questionnaire allows to conclude that the system was very welcome, and that the students appreciated the general gamified experience and the usefulness of the system. The data also allow to conclude that the students’ engagement was high and that the learners appear to be open to the possibility of using again 2TSW and any other web-based system supporting assessment of complex tasks, also on subject matters different than Computer Programming.
