---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-works/research/closing-statement/","title":"Closing Statement","noteIcon":"1","created":"May 13, 2024 15:04","updated":"Sep 12, 2024 23:24"}
---


Peer code review is a valuable learning tool in CS education, but many students lack the intrinsic motivation to provide thoughtful, constructive feedback. This gap undermines the potential of peer code review to improve coding skills, foster collaboration, and prepare students for professional environments. This study investigates the use of a GBL approach to enhance student motivation and feedback quality during peer code review in a computer science course. Students will be randomly assigned to either a GBL-based peer code review group or a control group using traditional methods. Following the activity, both groups will complete the IMI to assess motivation and a code review taxonomy will be applied to evaluate feedback quality. Statistical analysis will compare IMI scores and the prevalence of feedback types between the groups to determine if the GBL intervention had a significant impact. The goal is to develop GBL design principles that promote intrinsic motivation and improve the overall effectiveness of peer code review in computer science education.

By investigating what makes peer code review motivating (or not), the students' participation could lead to the design of interventions that make peer code review a more engaging and beneficial process for everyone. The students' participation could help students develop stronger feedback skills, crucial for both their success in CS courses and future careers. The findings could provide valuable information to the instructor and others about how to refine peer code review practices, potentially leading to widespread changes that enhance the learning experience for many CS students.
