---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-works/research/conceptual-framework/","title":"Conceptual Framework","created":"2024-02-10","updated":"2024-09-13"}
---


Providing effective code review feedback is a crucial skill for CS students as they prepare to enter the workforce [@sadowski2018]. From my experience as a professional software developer in the industry, I know that PCR is a fundamental skill for programmers. From my experience as a CS student, I know that traditional academic approaches do not always engage or motivate learners especially for the PCR process. On the other end, as a CS teacher, I have seen firsthand how disengaged students can be during PCR sessions. Providing superficial feedback benefits neither the reviewer nor the reviewee. I want to help create a classroom environment where feedback is constructive and where students feel empowered as part of the development process. It is important to create an environment where feedback is constructive and empowers students as part of the development process [@hattie2007]. This is particularly crucial for developing essential skills in professional software developers, such as giving effective feedback during PCR.

This lack of motivation frequently results in surface-level feedback that does little to improve code quality or foster deep learning [@ramsden2003]. This disengagement poses a significant challenge for educators aiming to maximize the effectiveness of PCR practices. The root of this issue may be motivational. SDT provides a potential lens for understanding this phenomenon by highlighting the importance of competence, autonomy, and relatedness for intrinsic motivation [@deci1994]. Traditional PCR processes may fail to adequately support these needs: _competence_, where students may doubt their ability to provide valuable feedback or feel that the focus is solely on error-finding or quality-assurance testing; _autonomy_, where limited choices in how to engage with PCR (code to review, feedback format, etc.) may stifle student ownership; and _relatedness_, where a lack of community focus or a shared sense of purpose can diminish the feeling that PCR is a collaborative improvement process.

GBL offers a promising approach to address these motivational barriers hindering effective PCR. GBL prioritizes immersion, challenge, and (sometimes) social interaction [@papastergiou2009]. These elements have the potential to: _enhance competence_, where well-designed challenges and in-game rewards can build confidence as coding proficiency increases; _foster autonomy_, where GBL systems can offer choices within a structured learning experience, increasing student agency; and _promote relatedness_, where narrative and collaborative gameplay can make PCR feel more purposeful and community-oriented.

As an avid player of both digital and analogue games, I find that my experience in gaming also influences my interest in this topic. In the world of gaming, especially in multiplayer games, communication and teamwork are crucial for success. Similarly, in the area of PCR, effective communication and collaboration are essential for producing high-quality code. Furthermore, the problem-solving and critical thinking skills honed through gaming also translate to the world of programming and code review. The analytical mindset and attention to detail required in gaming parallel the skills needed for thorough code review [@schmitz2011]. Understanding how to engage and motivate students in the context of PCR aligns with the principles of game design, where creating an engaging and immersive experience is paramount. I believe my experience playing games provides me with a unique perspective on the dynamics of PCR and motivates me to delve deeper into this topic.

In this study, I want to examine the quality of PCR feedback and GBL through the lens of student motivation and SDT. Observing the influence of GBL on the quality of feedback provided during PCR will be the key focus of this research. By harnessing the potential of GBL to transform PCR into a more intrinsically motivating, and subsequently, more valuable learning experience, my ultimate goal is to develop GBL interventions that increase student engagement, leading to higher-quality feedback that benefits everyone involved.
