---
{"title":"From Teaching to Learning - A New Paradigm For Undergraduate Education","authors":["[[Robert B. Barr]]","[[John Tagg]]"],"date":"1995-11-01","processed":true,"dg-publish":true,"tags":["pedagogy","conceptual"],"zotero":"zotero://select/library/items/I6B4WD94","created":"2024-11-01","modified":"2024-11-03","permalink":"/20-literature-notes/barr1995/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"updated":"2024-11-03"}
---


> [!insights]+
> The shift from the _Instruction Paradigm_ to the _Learning Paradigm_ redefines the purpose of higher education from delivering instruction to actively producing learning, emphasizing student engagement and outcomes.

> [!summary]+
> Barr and Tagg’s work highlights a significant shift in American higher education, moving from the traditional _Instruction Paradigm_, which centers on the delivery of lectures and teaching as the primary mission, to the _Learning Paradigm_, where the focus is on creating learning environments that promote student understanding and success. The new paradigm encourages viewing colleges as institutions responsible for student learning, not just the transmission of knowledge.
>
> Key contrasts between the paradigms:
> - **Mission and Purposes**: The Instruction Paradigm sees the institution’s role as providing instruction, whereas the Learning Paradigm prioritizes producing learning through diverse, student-centered methods.
>
> - **Criteria for Success**: The Instruction Paradigm values input measures like enrollment and resources, while the Learning Paradigm focuses on outcomes and student success.
>
> - **Learning Theory**: Instruction is teacher-centered in the old model; the new model makes students active participants, constructing their own understanding.
>
> - **Structure and Productivity**: The traditional model holds time constant while learning varies; the new model allows flexible time for consistent learning outcomes, shifting productivity focus to units of learning per student.
>
> This transition addresses the gap between educators’ beliefs (espoused theories) and the actual practices (theory-in-use) within educational institutions. The _Learning Paradigm_ pushes for continuous assessment, adaptation, and innovative learning experiences that prioritize student understanding over rigid, time-bound instruction.

> [!cite]+
> Barr, R. B., & Tagg, J. (1995). From Teaching to Learning—A New Paradigm For Undergraduate Education. _Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning_, _27_(6), 12–26. [https://doi.org/10.1080/00091383.1995.10544672](https://doi.org/10.1080/00091383.1995.10544672)
