---
share: true
---
# Tracking Students’ Cognitive Processes During Program Debugging—An Eye-Movement Approach

## Metadata

- Item Type: [Article](Article.md) 
- Authors: [Yu-Tzu Lin](Yu-Tzu%20Lin.md), [Cheng-Chih Wu](Cheng-Chih%20Wu.md), [Ting-Yun Hou](Ting-Yun%20Hou.md), [Yu-Chih Lin](Yu-Chih%20Lin.md), [Fang-Ying Yang](Fang-Ying%20Yang.md), [Chia-Hu Chang](Chia-Hu%20Chang.md)
- Date: [2016-08](2016-08.md)
- Date Added: [2021-09-16](2021-09-16.md)
- URL: [http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7312518/](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7312518/)
- DOI: [10.1109/TE.2015.2487341](https://doi.org/10.1109/TE.2015.2487341)
- Cite key: `lin2016`

## Zotero Links

- [Local library](zotero://select/items/1_UEKDPJB9)
- [Cloud library](http://zotero.org/users/4834315/items/UEKDPJB9)
- PDF Attachments
  - [Lin et al. - 2016 - Tracking Students’ Cognitive Processes During Prog.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ILIYMKNL)

## Key Ideas

- The authors studied students' ability to effectively debug a program using an eye-tracking device. The goal of this study was to determine the cognitive processes (mainly problem-solving) used by both high and low performance students while debugging.
- Lin et al. define a *beacon* as a potential area in the code that might be causing the bug. More experienced programmers are faster at locating these beacons.
- The eye-tracking was used to determine how the speed and accuracy of identifying beacons in both high and low performing students.
- The experiment was done on 22 male and 16 female undergraduate Computer Science students who had at least one year of experience in the C programming language.
- Lin et al. ultimately found that the low performing students were aimless and could not come up with a debugging plan of attack. High performing students were able to chunk the problem and build a solid mental model of the program and where the bug could be. 