---
share: true
---
# Learning through computational creativity

## Metadata

- Item Type: [Article](Article.md) 
- Authors: [Leen-Kiat Soh](Leen-Kiat%20Soh.md), [Duane F. Shell](Duane%20F.%20Shell.md), [Elizabeth Ingraham](Elizabeth%20Ingraham.md), [Stephen Ramsay](Stephen%20Ramsay.md), [Brian Moore](Brian%20Moore.md)
- Date: [2015-07-23](2015-07-23.md)
- Date Added: [2021-09-16](2021-09-16.md)
- URL: [https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2699391](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2699391)
- DOI: [10.1145/2699391](https://doi.org/10.1145/2699391)
- Cite key: `soh2015`

## Zotero Links

- [Local library](zotero://select/items/1_85H9DCIW)
- [Cloud library](http://zotero.org/users/4834315/items/85H9DCIW)
- PDF Attachments
  - [Soh et al. - 2015 - Learning through computational creativity.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RVSYU6L3)

## Key Ideas

- Computer Science students not only need to know how to think computationally, but think creatively as well.
- Computational thinking and creative thinking should not be seen as a dichotomy.
- The authors used [*Epstein's Generativity Theory*](./epstein1993.md) as a framework for the tool they developed. The framework consists of 4 dimensions:
  1. **Broadening**: You'll be able to tackle a wider array of problems if you possess skills from many different domains.
  2. **Challenging**: When solutions you're used to using don't work, this enables you to come up with a more creative solution.
  3. **Surrounding**: While *broadening* applies to diverse knowledge and skills (how/what), *surrounding* applies to diverse environments (when/where/who). The more people/situations you interact with will lead to experiencing new perspectives you may not had considered before.
  4. **Capturing**: The act of purposefully recording new solutions to problems and new skills as you learn them so that you can more effectively use them in future situations. ([@soh2015, 33](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RVSYU6L3?page=1))
- The authors created *Computational Creativity Exercises (CCEs)* using the principles from *Epstein's Generativity Theory*. For example:
  1. Describe an everyday object to a person that has never heard of it (ex. mechanical pencil)
  2. Analyze the object and how it would be represented in code (class/function/variable)
  3. Reflect on what you came up with and determine if any functions can be abstracted to fit a more general purpose. ([@soh2015, 34](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RVSYU6L3?page=2)) ^1f70d8
- In addition to creative and computational thinking, the CCE's help the students by getting them to create connections between ideas and concepts. Through repetition, the students will learn through using discipline specific language at higher levels of abstraction.
- The authors found a significant correlation between the rate of completion of CCE's and the students' grade in the course. A computational thinking knowledge test was administered to gauge the effectiveness of the CCEs and the results were positive. The more CCEs a student completed, the higher their letter grade was and the higher they scored on the computational thinking knowledge test. ([@soh2015, 35](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RVSYU6L3?page=3))
