---
{"title":"My Philosophy of Education","tags":["pedagogy"],"created":"2021-05-16","modified":"2021-05-16","dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/50-works/my-philosophy-of-education/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"updated":"2021-05-16"}
---


My philosophy of education is that all students should make learning meaningful so that they can grow intellectually, spiritually, and emotionally to better themselves and others. I believe that four essential elements promote meaningful learning and personal growth when combined. First, learners must feel a sense of a community where they feel safe to explore their thoughts and beliefs, where they are encouraged to question those of others and where they feel a sense of responsibility for themselves and others in the community; a community where diversity is welcomed and appreciated. Second, learners must engage in well-thought-out, collaborative educational experiences that challenge their prior knowledge and trigger self-reflection to transform meaning perspectives. Third, students should learn through a subject-centred model to see the bigger picture and relate their education to the real world. Finally, students should receive feedback from both teachers and peers as they work in the zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1962) to find meaning in their learning.

Ultimately, the power of education lies in its ability to evoke change, whether it be limited to an individual or extrapolated to society. I firmly believe that when pedagogy incorporates these four elements, students are better suited to find meaning in their learning and become destined for positive, transformational change.

## Introduction

I never wanted to become a teacher. Education was the last thing on my mind when I was pursuing my bachelor's degree in Computer Science at Concordia University in 2012. Obtaining the degree was another checkbox to tick off in my career's trajectory. It was that checkbox treatment that led me to flunk out of the university in 2016. I did not see the point of continuing because I already had a freelance business that was enough to sustain my lifestyle–why burden myself with more unnecessary work? I did not see the value of education until the Master Teacher Program hired me as a technical support person. In my glorified auditing of the courses, I realized that teaching Computer Science had the potential of a rewarding career path. This revelation provided me with the motivation I needed to finish off my degree and start looking for teaching jobs.

When I first began teaching in the Computer Science program at John Abbott College two years ago, I wanted to espouse all the pedagogical best practices I had witnessed in the Master Teacher Program courses. I tried my best to ensure that I presented information in a clear and organized fashion so that students could absorb as much information as possible; I did not want to the banker that Freire (2000) described. Since beginning the Master Teaching Program, I have attempted to adopt a social constructivist approach (Powell & Kalina, 2009), shifting from teacher-centred to student-centred learning (Biggs, 1999) with a significant focus on developing active  instructional strategies (Faust & Paulson, 1998).

I have always been a very reflective teacher, even since the get-go. I make great efforts to adjust my courses to meet the learning needs of students to encourage their success. As I progress through the MTP, however, I am challenged to reflect upon areas of teaching that I had not previously considered and learn that my teaching praxis continues to be a work in progress. This Philosophy of Education course has been a testament to this. It has encouraged me to dig deeper beyond the methodology of pedagogy to incorporate additional facets of teaching and learning.

## The Aim of Education

I think that education should play a pivotal role in helping individuals become independent, critical thinkers to become productive members of society. An educational system that challenges learners to question and reflect upon their knowledge, views, and beliefs and how they relate to others helps create a more just society that focuses on the common good instead of individual gain (Bengsten & Barnett, 2017). Education should teach students to be tolerant and respectful of the views of others while at the same time providing them with the knowledge and tools to be able to instill change through dialogue, reflection, and democratic processes. In essence, the role of education is to help advance the world and make it a better place for all.

## My Students

I work with students with a variety of backgrounds. Although many are young adults who have lived in Montreal their whole lives, some are older adults who have uprooted their families to settle in Montreal to begin a new life and career. My classroom represents a mosaic of learning styles and abilities with varying degrees of motivation for learning.

For the most part, I teach students who are impressionable yet who enter the program with specific preconceived epistemic ideas about learning which are initially resistant to change. Most students originally expect me to be Freire's (2000) banker whose _raison d’être_ is to deposit knowledge into their passive yet receptive minds. They do not want to think about the material; they want to know it. Because they see the teacher as expert and all-knowing, most are reluctant to engage in dialogue to express their thoughts as they might be "wrong" (Moore, 1994). Initially, they fail to see the classroom as a learning community to which their contributions are valuable and from which peers and the teacher can learn (Palmer, 2017). They enter the program taking a back-seat approach; they want to be directed and driven and follow along with the expectation that they will operate autonomously after spending some time watching me.

Regardless of how students start in our program, they leave changed individuals. They learn how to think critically and reflectively. Rogers (2004) would argue that our students ultimately find meaning in their lived experiences. As a teacher, it is rewarding to see how our students evolve from memorizers to thinkers (Moore, 1994). Once obsessed with acquiring knowledge to achieve high grades, our students transform into individuals who want to learn and improve their understanding. Their goal becomes to grow professionally to develop quality software; this normally occurs when they are introduced to the stage setting where they work with real companies for the first time. This authentic environment helps our students find meaning in what they have been learning, and it suddenly becomes natural to them; it is not regular school anymore. The change is transformational, and it is a privilege not only to see but also to think that I have played a part in it.

## My Role as a Teacher

I believe that my role as a teacher is to facilitate learning by using my insight to plan new experiences that challenge students to rethink their meaning schemes and perspectives (Mezirow, 1991), leading to growth and continuity (Reed & Johnson, 2000). In creating "a space in which the community of truth is practiced" (Palmer, 2017, p. 92), students feel valued and can be honest about their learning. My role is to show students we can all learn from one another without judgment, despite our differences. In leading by example, I can demonstrate the importance of staying true to one's identity while self-reflecting upon one's own knowledge, beliefs, values, and feelings, identifying biases (Breunig, 2006) remaining open to change.  As their teacher, I should help students build positive self-efficacy and view learning as an experimental process; just because one did not get it the first time does not mean that it is unattainable.

Yes, my role as a teacher is to create educative experiences, provide guidance and support, and monitor learning; but it is so much more than that. My role is to teach students the importance of knowledge and education. My role is to understand and appreciate how education provides opportunities and allows one to question, discuss, debate, and reflect. My role is to show how all of this can lead to internal change and personal growth. These opportunities can also influence external change to allow for societal development (Breunig, 2006). Without the desire to change, individuals nor society can evolve.

## What it Means to Learn

Learning occurs when new experiences are presented to us that challenge and transform our meaning perspectives (Mezirow, 1991). For this to happen, teachers must provide educative experiences to learners that cause them to rethink their views and beliefs, reflect critically, and engage in rational discourse. A learner who changes their mind or thoughts following such an experience is likely to have learned. Once someone has learned, their new beliefs and views will enable them to approach future experiences differently than they otherwise would have. One who has learned has found the experience to be both enriching and meaningful, and they leave the experience a transformed individual.

I can see when transformational learning happens with my students. It involves more than an improved understanding of subject material. When our Computer Science students undergo transformational learning, there is not only a change in their way of thinking, but there is a complete change in their attitude, confidence, motivation, and self-efficacy.

## Pedagogical Approaches

In my opinion, teaching using a social constructivist approach results in deeper learning (Ramsden, 2003). When working collaboratively, students experience opportunities to share resources and skills. In sharing, we make our knowledge public, which initiates a cascade effect of feedback followed by self-reflection. As Palmer states, "the most practical thing we can achieve in any kind of work is insight into what is happening inside of us as we do it" (2017, p. 6). One of the most remarkable skills that we can teach our students is the art of self-reflection so that they can become effective, lifelong learners, and not repeat the same mistakes from their past (Greene, 1984, p. 59).

I also believe that using Palmer's (2017) subject-centred model allows students to appreciate the bigger picture. Often students think that they need to determine what I, the teacher, want from them, and they complain that all teachers are looking for something different. By putting the subject in the center, I think that students will realize that it is not the teacher's needs that matter, but that of the subject. With software development at the center, students can better appreciate that it does not matter who the teacher is, as the code (subject) directs the thought process. I firmly believe that the subject-centred model is an efficient pedagogical approach as it provides context and helps the learner see the significance of what they are learning.

Finally, I believe that students need to feel a sense of community. In feeling supported, accepted, valued, respected, and sharing common interests and goals, students will feel a sense of accountability and responsibility to the community. They will feel the need to participate and contribute, and in doing so, they construct their knowledge. Students must learn in a comfortable and safe environment. Without such, I do not believe that they can maximize their learning potential as they will feel too vulnerable to take risks.

## Espoused Philosophy and Current Teaching Practice Alignment

I can truthfully say that my current teaching praxis is not very aligned with my espoused philosophy of education. I am not sure how it could have been because there was a gross lack of knowledge (on my part) regarding the implications of education on society and the world. Sure, I knew that the more educated the population, the better the world could be; however, I never dug more profound than this. I never thought of the oppressed, the disadvantaged, or the power of the elite. I just thought that those who receive an education would advance society for all others. I never thought much of the fact that our community and educational system may favour the success of some over others. There is already so much to absorb as a new teacher that I cannot comprehend having to prepare entire new courses on top of considering the societal implications (Noddings, 2013) of what I am teaching. I hope I can get there one day.

My newfound knowledge makes me realize that although my philosophy of education still centers around finding meaning in one's learning, the pathway to doing so is intricate. It is not as simple as just trying to relate learning best software development practices. Our students are diverse, each with unique backgrounds, identities, and beliefs. I am unique in my own identity, ideas, and biases.

The educational system is complex with its numerous flaws. Remembering this will drive me to incorporate the four essential elements of my philosophy of education in my teaching praxis. I sincerely believe that in doing so, I can play an influential part in helping my students grow and hopefully inspire them to pay it forward.

## References

- Bengsten, S., & Barnett, R. (2017). Confronting the dark side of higher education. _Journal of Philosophy of Education, 51_(1), 114-131.
- Biggs, J. (1999). What the student does: Teaching for enhanced learning. _Higher Education Research & Development, 18_(1), 57-75.
- Breunig, M. (2006). Turning experiential education and critical pedagogy theory into praxis. _The Journal of Experiential Education, 28_(2), 106-122.
- Faust, J. L., & Paulson, D. R. (1998). Active learning in the college classroom. _Journal on Excellence in College Teaching, 9_(2), 2-24.
- Freire, P. (2000). Chapter 2. In _Pedagogy of the oppressed_ (pp. 71-86). Bloomsbury, NY.
- Greene, M. (1984). How we think about our craft. _Teachers College Record, 86_(1), 55-67.
- Mezirow, J. (1991). _Transformative dimensions of adult learning._ San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
- Moore, W. S. (1994). Student and faculty epistemology in the college classroom: The Perry schema of intellectual and ethical development. In K. Pritchard, & R. M. Sawyer (Eds.), _Handbook of college teaching_ (pp. 45-67). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
- Noddings, N. (2013). Schooling for democracy. In W. Hare, & J. P. Portelli (Eds.), _Philosophy of education: Introductory readings_ (pp. 403-413). Alberta: Brush Education.
- Palmer, P. J. (2017). _The courage to teach: Exploring the inner landscape of a teacher's life._ Jossey-Bass.
- Powell, K., & Kalina, C. (2009). Cognitive and social constructivism: Developing tools for an effective classroom. _Education, 130_(2), 241-250.
- Ramsden, P. (2003). Approaches to learning. In _Learning to Teach in Higher Education_ (pp. 38-61). New York: Routledge.
- Reed, R. F., & Johnson, T. W. (2000). John Dewey: An excerpt from Experience & Education. In _Philosophical document in education_ (pp. 105-115). Longman, New York.
- Rogers, C. (2004). Defining reflection: Another look at John Dewey and reflective thinking. _Teachers College Record, 104_, 842-866.
- Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). _Thought and language._ Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
